---
layout: post
title: The A20 Line
date: 2026-5-10 00:48:00
description: Details about the A20 Line
tags: osdev
featured: false
---

## Background
The Intel 8086 processor had an address bus that was 20 bits wide. It means it could theoretically address upto 2^20 (1 MiB)  memory locations. Any memory location that is larger than this would wrap around 0. 

As an example, with 20 bits, the largest memory that could be addressed was `F FFFF`. The next memory address would be `10 0000`, which would translate to 0. Some early programs used to utilize this to write programs that accesses the lower portion of the memory, instead of directly using the lower memory addresses.

When later Intel processors came, it could address more memory locations. As an example, Intel 286 could address 16 MiB of memory. Which means that it could address (4^2) \* (2^20) = (2^24) memory locations. To keep the older programs compatible, the wraparound feature had to be enabled on the new generation of processors. 

It means that to really access all of the memory, the A20 line has to be enabled, which enables not only the A20 line, but also higher lines so that higher memory could be accessed.

## Testing if A20 Line is Enabled

In real mode, segmented memory model is activated. Which means memory is accessed in `base_address:offset` format. The physical is calculated as `base_address * 16 + offset` in decimal, or `base_address * 10 + offset` in hex. If the A20 line is disabled, then wraparound is available. If a value at physical location `x` and `1 MiB + x` is the same, then there is a very high chance that A20 line is disabled. To be sure, this test can be repeated for a second location and if the value comes back as the same, then we can be sure that A20 line is disabled.

The boot signature word `0xAA55` is located at offset 0x1FF from where the bootsector is loaded in memory. The bootsector is loaded at bootsector `0x7C00`. So if we test the byte at physical memory location `0x7C00 + 0x1FE = 7DFF` or in `0000:7DFF`, it should be 0xAA55. Then we can add 1MiB from this memory location, which would be `0X7DFE + 0xFFFF = 0x107DFE` or `FFFF:7E0E`, and if it is also 0xAA55, there is a very low chance that it is by chance.

```nasm

[ORG 0x7C00]

xor ax, ax
mov es, ax
mov byte ax, [es:0x7DFE]

mov word bx, 0xAA55

cmp ax, bx
je equal_values

mov ax, 0xB800
mov es, ax

mov byte [es:0], 'N'
mov byte [es:1], 0x07

equal_values:

mov word ax, 0xB800
mov word es, ax

mov byte [es:0], 'Y'
mov byte [es:1], 0x07

```


